Documentation/admin-guide/pm/amd-pstate.rst, before:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0
.. include:: <isonum.txt>

===============================================
``amd-pstate`` CPU Performance Scaling Driver
===============================================

:Copyright: |copy| 2021 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.

:Author: Huang Rui <ray.huang@amd.com>


Introduction
===================

``amd-pstate`` is the AMD CPU performance scaling driver that introduces a
new CPU frequency control mechanism on modern AMD APU and CPU series in
Linux kernel. The new mechanism is based on Collaborative Processor
Performance Control (CPPC) which provides finer grain frequency management
than legacy ACPI hardware P-States. Current AMD CPU/APU platforms are using
the ACPI P-states driver to manage CPU frequency and clocks with switching
only in 3 P-states. CPPC replaces the ACPI P-states controls, allows a
flexible, low-latency interface for the Linux kernel to directly
communicate the performance hints to hardware.

``amd-pstate`` leverages the Linux kernel governors such as ``schedutil``,
``ondemand``, etc. to manage the performance hints which are provided by
CPPC hardware functionality that internally follows the hardware
specification (for details refer to AMD64 Architecture Programmer's Manual
Volume 2: System Programming [1]_). Currently ``amd-pstate`` supports basic
frequency control function according to kernel governors on some of the
Zen2 and Zen3 processors, and we will implement more AMD specific functions
in future after we verify them on the hardware and SBIOS.


AMD CPPC Overview
=======================

Collaborative Processor Performance Control (CPPC) interface enumerates a
continuous, abstract, and unit-less performance value in a scale that is
not tied to a specific performance state / frequency. This is an ACPI
standard [2]_ which software can specify application performance goals and
hints as a relative target to the infrastructure limits. AMD processors
provides the low latency register model (MSR) instead of AML code
interpreter for performance adjustments. ``amd-pstate`` will initialize a
``struct cpufreq_driver`` instance ``amd_pstate_driver`` with the callbacks
to manage each performance update behavior. ::

 Highest Perf ------>+-----------------------+                         +-----------------------+
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |          Max Perf  ---->|                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
 Nominal Perf ------>+-----------------------+                         +-----------------------+
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |      Desired Perf  ---->|                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
  Lowest non-        |                       |                         |                       |
  linear perf ------>+-----------------------+                         +-----------------------+
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |       Lowest perf  ---->|                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
  Lowest perf ------>+-----------------------+                         +-----------------------+
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
          0   ------>+-----------------------+                         +-----------------------+

                                     AMD P-States Performance Scale


.. _perf_cap:

AMD CPPC Performance Capability
--------------------------------

Highest Performance (RO)
.........................

It is the absolute maximum performance an individual processor may reach,
assuming ideal conditions. This performance level may not be sustainable
for long durations and may only be achievable if other platform components
are in a specific state; for example, it may require other processors be in
an idle state. This would be equivalent to the highest frequencies
supported by the processor.

Nominal (Guaranteed) Performance (RO)
......................................

It is the maximum sustained performance level of the processor, assuming
ideal operating conditions. In absence of an external constraint (power,
thermal, etc.) this is the performance level the processor is expected to
be able to maintain continuously. All cores/processors are expected to be
able to sustain their nominal performance state simultaneously.

Lowest non-linear Performance (RO)
...................................

It is the lowest performance level at which nonlinear power savings are
achieved, for example, due to the combined effects of voltage and frequency
scaling. Above this threshold, lower performance levels should be generally
more energy efficient than higher performance levels. This register
effectively conveys the most efficient performance level to ``amd-pstate``.

Lowest Performance (RO)
........................

It is the absolute lowest performance level of the processor. Selecting a
performance level lower than the lowest nonlinear performance level may
cause an efficiency penalty but should reduce the instantaneous power
consumption of the processor.

AMD CPPC Performance Control
------------------------------

``amd-pstate`` passes performance goals through these registers. The
register drives the behavior of the desired performance target.

Minimum requested performance (RW)
...................................

``amd-pstate`` specifies the minimum allowed performance level.

Maximum requested performance (RW)
...................................

``amd-pstate`` specifies a limit the maximum performance that is expected
to be supplied by the hardware.

Desired performance target (RW)
...................................

``amd-pstate`` specifies a desired target in the CPPC performance scale as
a relative number. This can be expressed as percentage of nominal
performance (infrastructure max). Below the nominal sustained performance
level, desired performance expresses the average performance level of the
processor subject to hardware. Above the nominal performance level,
processor must provide at least nominal performance requested and go higher
if current operating conditions allow.

Energy Performance Preference (EPP) (RW)
.........................................

Provides a hint to the hardware if software wants to bias toward performance
(0x0) or energy efficiency (0xff).


Key Governors Support
=======================

``amd-pstate`` can be used with all the (generic) scaling governors listed
by the ``scaling_available_governors`` policy attribute in ``sysfs``. Then,
it is responsible for the configuration of policy objects corresponding to
CPUs and provides the ``CPUFreq`` core (and the scaling governors attached
to the policy objects) with accurate information on the maximum and minimum
operating frequencies supported by the hardware. Users can check the
``scaling_cur_freq`` information comes from the ``CPUFreq`` core.

``amd-pstate`` mainly supports ``schedutil`` and ``ondemand`` for dynamic
frequency control. It is to fine tune the processor configuration on
``amd-pstate`` to the ``schedutil`` with CPU CFS scheduler. ``amd-pstate``
registers adjust_perf callback to implement the CPPC similar performance
update behavior. It is initialized by ``sugov_start`` and then populate the
CPU's update_util_data pointer to assign ``sugov_update_single_perf`` as
the utilization update callback function in CPU scheduler. CPU scheduler
will call ``cpufreq_update_util`` and assign the target performance
according to the ``struct sugov_cpu`` that utilization update belongs to.
Then ``amd-pstate`` updates the desired performance according to the CPU
scheduler assigned.


Processor Support
=======================

The ``amd-pstate`` initialization will fail if the _CPC in ACPI SBIOS is
not existed at the detected processor, and it uses ``acpi_cpc_valid`` to
check the _CPC existence. All Zen based processors support legacy ACPI
hardware P-States function, so while the ``amd-pstate`` fails to be
initialized, the kernel will fall back to initialize ``acpi-cpufreq``
driver.

There are two types of hardware implementations for ``amd-pstate``: one is
`Full MSR Support <perf_cap_>`_ and another is `Shared Memory Support
<perf_cap_>`_. It can use :c:macro:`X86_FEATURE_CPPC` feature flag (for
details refer to Processor Programming Reference (PPR) for AMD Family
19h Model 21h, Revision B0 Processors [3]_) to indicate the different
types. ``amd-pstate`` is to register different ``amd_pstate_perf_funcs``
instances for different hardware implementations.

Currently, some of Zen2 and Zen3 processors support ``amd-pstate``. In the
future, it will be supported on more and more AMD processors.

Full MSR Support
-----------------

Some new Zen3 processors such as Cezanne provide the MSR registers directly
while the :c:macro:`X86_FEATURE_CPPC` CPU feature flag is set.
``amd-pstate`` can handle the MSR register to implement the fast switch
function in ``CPUFreq`` that can shrink latency of frequency control on the
interrupt context.

Shared Memory Support
----------------------

If :c:macro:`X86_FEATURE_CPPC` CPU feature flag is not set, that means the
processor supports shared memory solution. In this case, ``amd-pstate``
uses the ``cppc_acpi`` helper methods to implement the callback functions
of ``amd_pstate_perf_funcs``.


AMD P-States and ACPI hardware P-States always can be supported in one
processor. But AMD P-States has the higher priority and if it is enabled
with :c:macro:`MSR_AMD_CPPC_ENABLE` or ``cppc_set_enable``, it will respond
to the request from AMD P-States.


User Space Interface in ``sysfs``
==================================

``amd-pstate`` exposes several global attributes (files) in ``sysfs`` to
control its functionality at the system level. They located in the
``/sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policyX/`` directory and affect all CPUs. ::

 root@hr-test1:/home/ray# ls /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/*amd*
 /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/amd_pstate_highest_perf
 /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/amd_pstate_lowest_nonlinear_freq
 /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/amd_pstate_lowest_nonlinear_perf
 /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/amd_pstate_lowest_perf
 /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/amd_pstate_max_freq
 /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/amd_pstate_min_freq
 /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/amd_pstate_nominal_freq
 /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/amd_pstate_nominal_perf


``amd_pstate_highest_perf / amd_pstate_max_freq``

Maximum CPPC performance and CPU frequency that the driver is allowed to
set in percent of the maximum supported CPPC performance level (the highest
performance supported in `AMD CPPC Performance Capability <perf_cap_>`_).
This attribute is read-only.

``amd_pstate_nominal_perf / amd_pstate_nominal_freq``

Nominal CPPC performance and CPU frequency that the driver is allowed to
set in percent of the maximum supported CPPC performance level (Please see
nominal performance in `AMD CPPC Performance Capability <perf_cap_>`_).
This attribute is read-only.

``amd_pstate_lowest_nonlinear_perf / amd_pstate_lowest_nonlinear_freq``

The lowest non-linear CPPC performance and CPU frequency that the driver is
allowed to set in percent of the maximum supported CPPC performance level
(Please see the lowest non-linear performance in `AMD CPPC Performance
Capability <perf_cap_>`_).
This attribute is read-only.

``amd_pstate_lowest_perf``

The lowest physical CPPC performance. The minimum CPU frequency can be read
back from ``cpuinfo`` member of ``cpufreq_policy``, so we won't expose it
here.
This attribute is read-only.


``amd-pstate`` vs ``acpi-cpufreq``
======================================

On majority of AMD platforms supported by ``acpi-cpufreq``, the ACPI tables
provided by the platform firmware used for CPU performance scaling, but
only provides 3 P-states on AMD processors.
However, on modern AMD APU and CPU series, it provides the collaborative
processor performance control according to ACPI protocol and customize this
for AMD platforms. That is fine-grain and continuous frequency range
instead of the legacy hardware P-states. ``amd-pstate`` is the kernel
module which supports the new AMD P-States mechanism on most of future AMD
platforms. The AMD P-States mechanism will be the more performance and energy
efficiency frequency management method on AMD processors.

``cpupower`` tool support for ``amd-pstate``
===============================================

``amd-pstate`` is supported on ``cpupower`` tool that can be used to dump the frequency
information. And it is in progress to support more and more operations for new
``amd-pstate`` module with this tool. ::

 root@hr-test1:/home/ray# cpupower frequency-info
 analyzing CPU 0:
   driver: amd-pstate
   CPUs which run at the same hardware frequency: 0
   CPUs which need to have their frequency coordinated by software: 0
   maximum transition latency: 131 us
   hardware limits: 400 MHz - 4.68 GHz
   available cpufreq governors: ondemand conservative powersave userspace performance schedutil
   current policy: frequency should be within 400 MHz and 4.68 GHz.
                   The governor "schedutil" may decide which speed to use
                   within this range.
   current CPU frequency: Unable to call hardware
   current CPU frequency: 4.02 GHz (asserted by call to kernel)
   boost state support:
     Supported: yes
     Active: yes
     AMD PSTATE Highest Performance: 166. Maximum Frequency: 4.68 GHz.
     AMD PSTATE Nominal Performance: 117. Nominal Frequency: 3.30 GHz.
     AMD PSTATE Lowest Non-linear Performance: 39. Lowest Non-linear Frequency: 1.10 GHz.
     AMD PSTATE Lowest Performance: 15. Lowest Frequency: 400 MHz.


Diagnostics and Tuning
=======================

Trace Events
--------------

There are two static trace events that can be used for ``amd-pstate``
diagnostics.  One of them is the cpu_frequency trace event generally used
by ``CPUFreq``, and the other one is the ``amd_pstate_perf`` trace event
specific to ``amd-pstate``.  The following sequence of shell commands can
be used to enable them and see their output (if the kernel is generally
configured to support event tracing). ::

 root@hr-test1:/home/ray# cd /sys/kernel/tracing/
 root@hr-test1:/sys/kernel/tracing# echo 1 > events/amd_cpu/enable
 root@hr-test1:/sys/kernel/tracing# cat trace
 # tracer: nop
 #
 # entries-in-buffer/entries-written: 47827/42233061   #P:2
 #
 #                                _-----=> irqs-off
 #                               / _----=> need-resched
 #                              | / _---=> hardirq/softirq
 #                              || / _--=> preempt-depth
 #                              ||| /     delay
 #           TASK-PID     CPU#  ||||   TIMESTAMP  FUNCTION
 #              | |         |   ||||      |         |
          <idle>-0       [015] dN...  4995.979886: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=15 changed=false fast_switch=true
          <idle>-0       [007] d.h..  4995.979893: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=7 changed=false fast_switch=true
             cat-2161    [000] d....  4995.980841: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=0 changed=false fast_switch=true
            sshd-2125    [004] d.s..  4995.980968: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=4 changed=false fast_switch=true
          <idle>-0       [007] d.s..  4995.980968: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=7 changed=false fast_switch=true
          <idle>-0       [003] d.s..  4995.980971: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=3 changed=false fast_switch=true
          <idle>-0       [011] d.s..  4995.980996: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=11 changed=false fast_switch=true

The cpu_frequency trace event will be triggered either by the ``schedutil`` scaling
governor (for the policies it is attached to), or by the ``CPUFreq`` core (for the
policies with other scaling governors).


Reference
===========

.. [1] AMD64 Architecture Programmer's Manual Volume 2: System Programming,
       https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/24593.pdf

.. [2] Advanced Configuration and Power Interface Specification,
       https://uefi.org/sites/default/files/resources/ACPI_Spec_6_4_Jan22.pdf

.. [3] Processor Programming Reference (PPR) for AMD Family 19h Model 21h, Revision B0 Processors
       https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/55898_B1_pub_0.50.zip

Commit message:

amd-pstate: sync with v5
Signed-off-by: Juuso Alasuutari <juuso.alasuutari@gmail.com>

Documentation/admin-guide/pm/amd-pstate.rst, after:

.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0
.. include:: <isonum.txt>

===============================================
``amd-pstate`` CPU Performance Scaling Driver
===============================================

:Copyright: |copy| 2021 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.

:Author: Huang Rui <ray.huang@amd.com>


Introduction
===================

``amd-pstate`` is the AMD CPU performance scaling driver that introduces a
new CPU frequency control mechanism on modern AMD APU and CPU series in
Linux kernel. The new mechanism is based on Collaborative Processor
Performance Control (CPPC) which provides finer grain frequency management
than legacy ACPI hardware P-States. Current AMD CPU/APU platforms are using
the ACPI P-states driver to manage CPU frequency and clocks with switching
only in 3 P-states. CPPC replaces the ACPI P-states controls, allows a
flexible, low-latency interface for the Linux kernel to directly
communicate the performance hints to hardware.

``amd-pstate`` leverages the Linux kernel governors such as ``schedutil``,
``ondemand``, etc. to manage the performance hints which are provided by
CPPC hardware functionality that internally follows the hardware
specification (for details refer to AMD64 Architecture Programmer's Manual
Volume 2: System Programming [1]_). Currently ``amd-pstate`` supports basic
frequency control function according to kernel governors on some of the
Zen2 and Zen3 processors, and we will implement more AMD specific functions
in future after we verify them on the hardware and SBIOS.


AMD CPPC Overview
=======================

Collaborative Processor Performance Control (CPPC) interface enumerates a
continuous, abstract, and unit-less performance value in a scale that is
not tied to a specific performance state / frequency. This is an ACPI
standard [2]_ which software can specify application performance goals and
hints as a relative target to the infrastructure limits. AMD processors
provides the low latency register model (MSR) instead of AML code
interpreter for performance adjustments. ``amd-pstate`` will initialize a
``struct cpufreq_driver`` instance ``amd_pstate_driver`` with the callbacks
to manage each performance update behavior. ::

 Highest Perf ------>+-----------------------+                         +-----------------------+
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |          Max Perf  ---->|                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
 Nominal Perf ------>+-----------------------+                         +-----------------------+
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |      Desired Perf  ---->|                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
  Lowest non-        |                       |                         |                       |
  linear perf ------>+-----------------------+                         +-----------------------+
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |       Lowest perf  ---->|                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
  Lowest perf ------>+-----------------------+                         +-----------------------+
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
                     |                       |                         |                       |
          0   ------>+-----------------------+                         +-----------------------+

                                     AMD P-States Performance Scale


.. _perf_cap:

AMD CPPC Performance Capability
--------------------------------

Highest Performance (RO)
.........................

It is the absolute maximum performance an individual processor may reach,
assuming ideal conditions. This performance level may not be sustainable
for long durations and may only be achievable if other platform components
are in a specific state; for example, it may require other processors be in
an idle state. This would be equivalent to the highest frequencies
supported by the processor.

Nominal (Guaranteed) Performance (RO)
......................................

It is the maximum sustained performance level of the processor, assuming
ideal operating conditions. In absence of an external constraint (power,
thermal, etc.) this is the performance level the processor is expected to
be able to maintain continuously. All cores/processors are expected to be
able to sustain their nominal performance state simultaneously.

Lowest non-linear Performance (RO)
...................................

It is the lowest performance level at which nonlinear power savings are
achieved, for example, due to the combined effects of voltage and frequency
scaling. Above this threshold, lower performance levels should be generally
more energy efficient than higher performance levels. This register
effectively conveys the most efficient performance level to ``amd-pstate``.

Lowest Performance (RO)
........................

It is the absolute lowest performance level of the processor. Selecting a
performance level lower than the lowest nonlinear performance level may
cause an efficiency penalty but should reduce the instantaneous power
consumption of the processor.

AMD CPPC Performance Control
------------------------------

``amd-pstate`` passes performance goals through these registers. The
register drives the behavior of the desired performance target.

Minimum requested performance (RW)
...................................

``amd-pstate`` specifies the minimum allowed performance level.

Maximum requested performance (RW)
...................................

``amd-pstate`` specifies a limit the maximum performance that is expected
to be supplied by the hardware.

Desired performance target (RW)
...................................

``amd-pstate`` specifies a desired target in the CPPC performance scale as
a relative number. This can be expressed as percentage of nominal
performance (infrastructure max). Below the nominal sustained performance
level, desired performance expresses the average performance level of the
processor subject to hardware. Above the nominal performance level,
processor must provide at least nominal performance requested and go higher
if current operating conditions allow.

Energy Performance Preference (EPP) (RW)
.........................................

Provides a hint to the hardware if software wants to bias toward performance
(0x0) or energy efficiency (0xff).


Key Governors Support
=======================

``amd-pstate`` can be used with all the (generic) scaling governors listed
by the ``scaling_available_governors`` policy attribute in ``sysfs``. Then,
it is responsible for the configuration of policy objects corresponding to
CPUs and provides the ``CPUFreq`` core (and the scaling governors attached
to the policy objects) with accurate information on the maximum and minimum
operating frequencies supported by the hardware. Users can check the
``scaling_cur_freq`` information comes from the ``CPUFreq`` core.

``amd-pstate`` mainly supports ``schedutil`` and ``ondemand`` for dynamic
frequency control. It is to fine tune the processor configuration on
``amd-pstate`` to the ``schedutil`` with CPU CFS scheduler. ``amd-pstate``
registers adjust_perf callback to implement the CPPC similar performance
update behavior. It is initialized by ``sugov_start`` and then populate the
CPU's update_util_data pointer to assign ``sugov_update_single_perf`` as
the utilization update callback function in CPU scheduler. CPU scheduler
will call ``cpufreq_update_util`` and assign the target performance
according to the ``struct sugov_cpu`` that utilization update belongs to.
Then ``amd-pstate`` updates the desired performance according to the CPU
scheduler assigned.


Processor Support
=======================

The ``amd-pstate`` initialization will fail if the _CPC in ACPI SBIOS is
not existed at the detected processor, and it uses ``acpi_cpc_valid`` to
check the _CPC existence. All Zen based processors support legacy ACPI
hardware P-States function, so while the ``amd-pstate`` fails to be
initialized, the kernel will fall back to initialize ``acpi-cpufreq``
driver.

There are two types of hardware implementations for ``amd-pstate``: one is
`Full MSR Support <perf_cap_>`_ and another is `Shared Memory Support
<perf_cap_>`_. It can use :c:macro:`X86_FEATURE_CPPC` feature flag (for
details refer to Processor Programming Reference (PPR) for AMD Family
19h Model 51h, Revision A1 Processors [3]_) to indicate the different
types. ``amd-pstate`` is to register different ``static_call`` instances
for different hardware implementations.

Currently, some of Zen2 and Zen3 processors support ``amd-pstate``. In the
future, it will be supported on more and more AMD processors.

Full MSR Support
-----------------

Some new Zen3 processors such as Cezanne provide the MSR registers directly
while the :c:macro:`X86_FEATURE_CPPC` CPU feature flag is set.
``amd-pstate`` can handle the MSR register to implement the fast switch
function in ``CPUFreq`` that can shrink latency of frequency control on the
interrupt context. The functions with ``pstate_xxx`` prefix represent the
operations of MSR registers.

Shared Memory Support
----------------------

If :c:macro:`X86_FEATURE_CPPC` CPU feature flag is not set, that means the
processor supports shared memory solution. In this case, ``amd-pstate``
uses the ``cppc_acpi`` helper methods to implement the callback functions
that defined on ``static_call``. The functions with ``cppc_xxx`` prefix
represent the operations of acpi cppc helpers for shared memory solution.


AMD P-States and ACPI hardware P-States always can be supported in one
processor. But AMD P-States has the higher priority and if it is enabled
with :c:macro:`MSR_AMD_CPPC_ENABLE` or ``cppc_set_enable``, it will respond
to the request from AMD P-States.


User Space Interface in ``sysfs``
==================================

``amd-pstate`` exposes several global attributes (files) in ``sysfs`` to
control its functionality at the system level. They located in the
``/sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policyX/`` directory and affect all CPUs. ::

 root@hr-test1:/home/ray# ls /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/*amd*
 /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/amd_pstate_highest_perf
 /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/amd_pstate_lowest_nonlinear_freq
 /sys/devices/system/cpu/cpufreq/policy0/amd_pstate_max_freq


``amd_pstate_highest_perf / amd_pstate_max_freq``

Maximum CPPC performance and CPU frequency that the driver is allowed to
set in percent of the maximum supported CPPC performance level (the highest
performance supported in `AMD CPPC Performance Capability <perf_cap_>`_).
In some of ASICs, the highest CPPC performance is not the one in the _CPC
table, so we need to expose it to sysfs. If boost is not active but
supported, this maximum frequency will be larger than the one in
``cpuinfo``.
This attribute is read-only.

``amd_pstate_lowest_nonlinear_freq``

The lowest non-linear CPPC CPU frequency that the driver is allowed to set
in percent of the maximum supported CPPC performance level (Please see the
lowest non-linear performance in `AMD CPPC Performance Capability
<perf_cap_>`_).
This attribute is read-only.

For other performance and frequency values, we can read them back from
``/sys/devices/system/cpu/cpuX/acpi_cppc/``, see :ref:`cppc_sysfs`.


``amd-pstate`` vs ``acpi-cpufreq``
======================================

On majority of AMD platforms supported by ``acpi-cpufreq``, the ACPI tables
provided by the platform firmware used for CPU performance scaling, but
only provides 3 P-states on AMD processors.
However, on modern AMD APU and CPU series, it provides the collaborative
processor performance control according to ACPI protocol and customize this
for AMD platforms. That is fine-grain and continuous frequency range
instead of the legacy hardware P-states. ``amd-pstate`` is the kernel
module which supports the new AMD P-States mechanism on most of future AMD
platforms. The AMD P-States mechanism will be the more performance and energy
efficiency frequency management method on AMD processors.

``cpupower`` tool support for ``amd-pstate``
===============================================

``amd-pstate`` is supported on ``cpupower`` tool that can be used to dump the frequency
information. And it is in progress to support more and more operations for new
``amd-pstate`` module with this tool. ::

 root@hr-test1:/home/ray# cpupower frequency-info
 analyzing CPU 0:
   driver: amd-pstate
   CPUs which run at the same hardware frequency: 0
   CPUs which need to have their frequency coordinated by software: 0
   maximum transition latency: 131 us
   hardware limits: 400 MHz - 4.68 GHz
   available cpufreq governors: ondemand conservative powersave userspace performance schedutil
   current policy: frequency should be within 400 MHz and 4.68 GHz.
                   The governor "schedutil" may decide which speed to use
                   within this range.
   current CPU frequency: Unable to call hardware
   current CPU frequency: 4.02 GHz (asserted by call to kernel)
   boost state support:
     Supported: yes
     Active: yes
     AMD PSTATE Highest Performance: 166. Maximum Frequency: 4.68 GHz.
     AMD PSTATE Nominal Performance: 117. Nominal Frequency: 3.30 GHz.
     AMD PSTATE Lowest Non-linear Performance: 39. Lowest Non-linear Frequency: 1.10 GHz.
     AMD PSTATE Lowest Performance: 15. Lowest Frequency: 400 MHz.


Diagnostics and Tuning
=======================

Trace Events
--------------

There are two static trace events that can be used for ``amd-pstate``
diagnostics.  One of them is the cpu_frequency trace event generally used
by ``CPUFreq``, and the other one is the ``amd_pstate_perf`` trace event
specific to ``amd-pstate``.  The following sequence of shell commands can
be used to enable them and see their output (if the kernel is generally
configured to support event tracing). ::

 root@hr-test1:/home/ray# cd /sys/kernel/tracing/
 root@hr-test1:/sys/kernel/tracing# echo 1 > events/amd_cpu/enable
 root@hr-test1:/sys/kernel/tracing# cat trace
 # tracer: nop
 #
 # entries-in-buffer/entries-written: 47827/42233061   #P:2
 #
 #                                _-----=> irqs-off
 #                               / _----=> need-resched
 #                              | / _---=> hardirq/softirq
 #                              || / _--=> preempt-depth
 #                              ||| /     delay
 #           TASK-PID     CPU#  ||||   TIMESTAMP  FUNCTION
 #              | |         |   ||||      |         |
          <idle>-0       [015] dN...  4995.979886: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=15 changed=false fast_switch=true
          <idle>-0       [007] d.h..  4995.979893: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=7 changed=false fast_switch=true
             cat-2161    [000] d....  4995.980841: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=0 changed=false fast_switch=true
            sshd-2125    [004] d.s..  4995.980968: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=4 changed=false fast_switch=true
          <idle>-0       [007] d.s..  4995.980968: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=7 changed=false fast_switch=true
          <idle>-0       [003] d.s..  4995.980971: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=3 changed=false fast_switch=true
          <idle>-0       [011] d.s..  4995.980996: amd_pstate_perf: amd_min_perf=85 amd_des_perf=85 amd_max_perf=166 cpu_id=11 changed=false fast_switch=true

The cpu_frequency trace event will be triggered either by the ``schedutil`` scaling
governor (for the policies it is attached to), or by the ``CPUFreq`` core (for the
policies with other scaling governors).


Reference
===========

.. [1] AMD64 Architecture Programmer's Manual Volume 2: System Programming,
       https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/24593.pdf

.. [2] Advanced Configuration and Power Interface Specification,
       https://uefi.org/sites/default/files/resources/ACPI_Spec_6_4_Jan22.pdf

.. [3] Processor Programming Reference (PPR) for AMD Family 19h Model 51h, Revision A1 Processors
       https://www.amd.com/system/files/TechDocs/56569-A1-PUB.zip
