Documentation/driver-api/miscellaneous.rst, before:

Parallel Port Devices
=====================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/parport.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/parport/ieee1284.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/parport/share.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/parport/daisy.c
   :internal:

16x50 UART Driver
=================

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/tty/serial/serial_core.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/tty/serial/8250/8250_core.c
   :export:

Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM)
============================

Pulse-width modulation is a modulation technique primarily used to
control power supplied to electrical devices.

The PWM framework provides an abstraction for providers and consumers of
PWM signals. A controller that provides one or more PWM signals is
registered as :c:type:`struct pwm_chip <pwm_chip>`. Providers
are expected to embed this structure in a driver-specific structure.
This structure contains fields that describe a particular chip.

A chip exposes one or more PWM signal sources, each of which exposed as
a :c:type:`struct pwm_device <pwm_device>`. Operations can be
performed on PWM devices to control the period, duty cycle, polarity and
active state of the signal.

Note that PWM devices are exclusive resources: they can always only be
used by one consumer at a time.

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/pwm.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/pwm/core.c
   :export:

Commit message:

docs/driver-api/miscellaneous: Remove kernel-doc of serial_core.c
commit 3ec17cb325ac731c2211e13f7eaa4b812694e218 upstream.

Since merge of tty-6.0-rc1, "make htmldocs" with Sphinx >=3.1 emits
a bunch of warnings indicating duplicate kernel-doc comments from
drivers/tty/serial/serial_core.c.

This is due to the kernel-doc directive for serial_core.c in
serial/drivers.rst added in the merge. It conflicts with an existing
kernel-doc directive in miscellaneous.rst.

Remove the latter directive and resolve the duplicates.

Signed-off-by: Akira Yokosawa <akiyks@gmail.com>
Fixes: 607ca0f742b7 ("Merge tag 'tty-6.0-rc1' of git://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/gregkh/tty")
Cc: stable@vger.kernel.org # 6.0
Cc: Jiri Slaby <jslaby@suse.cz>
Cc: Greg Kroah-Hartman <gregkh@linuxfoundation.org>
Reviewed-by: Jiri Slaby <jirislaby@kernel.org>
Link: https://lore.kernel.org/r/4e54c76a-138a-07e0-985a-dd83cb622208@gmail.com
Signed-off-by: Greg Kroah-Hartman <gregkh@linuxfoundation.org>

Documentation/driver-api/miscellaneous.rst, after:

Parallel Port Devices
=====================

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/parport.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/parport/ieee1284.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/parport/share.c
   :export:

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/parport/daisy.c
   :internal:

16x50 UART Driver
=================

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/tty/serial/8250/8250_core.c
   :export:

See serial/driver.rst for related APIs.

Pulse-Width Modulation (PWM)
============================

Pulse-width modulation is a modulation technique primarily used to
control power supplied to electrical devices.

The PWM framework provides an abstraction for providers and consumers of
PWM signals. A controller that provides one or more PWM signals is
registered as :c:type:`struct pwm_chip <pwm_chip>`. Providers
are expected to embed this structure in a driver-specific structure.
This structure contains fields that describe a particular chip.

A chip exposes one or more PWM signal sources, each of which exposed as
a :c:type:`struct pwm_device <pwm_device>`. Operations can be
performed on PWM devices to control the period, duty cycle, polarity and
active state of the signal.

Note that PWM devices are exclusive resources: they can always only be
used by one consumer at a time.

.. kernel-doc:: include/linux/pwm.h
   :internal:

.. kernel-doc:: drivers/pwm/core.c
   :export:
